Strengths
The midfield unit of five in a 3-5-2 formation provides both width to build around the opposition and numbers in central midfield to play through them, without the need for much in the way of movement or rotations. The three central midfielders can draw opponents into the middle of the pitch, before play is then spread wide to the wing-backs. They can then provide width on both sides at the same time.

Two centre-forwards can constantly occupy both opposing centre-backs in a back four. High wing-backs and one or two attacking midfielders can mean extra numbers in the final third, and a strong attacking threat.

In defence, three centre-backs provide numerical overloads against two centre-forwards. The back line can also quickly change from three to a five when the wing-backs drop. In possession, the three-player defence gives a strong foundation to build from. It doesn’t require any adjustments to have an overload in the first line, whether up against one or two centre-forwards.

The midfield three and front two can cover the central spaces well when out of possession, with lots of depth to plug gaps.

Weaknesses
Once the defence converts into a line of five, the wide areas in midfield are inevitably conceded. This allows the opposition to progress further up the pitch on the flanks.

The wing-backs are required to be more versatile and well-rounded players than either full-back or wingers in back-four systems, as they are needed almost constantly at both ends of the pitch. They also need to be extremely fit to cover a vast amount of ground.

If the opposition builds through the inside channels, the wider centre-backs can be drawn out of position, leaving gaps for penetrative runs in behind.

With the wing-backs often on their own out wide, it is difficult to create wide overloads in possession. It is also easier for opponents to isolate them in the defensive phase. If another player gets across to help the wing-back, that creates a gap elsewhere in the structure.

