Strengths
The main strength of a 4-3-3 is the presence of a third player in central midfield, which creates a numerical overload when up against a team playing with two. This helps in build-up, playing through the lines, creating chances and overall domination of possession. The basic shape of a 4-3-3 tends to create more triangles between players, and so more passing lanes are open to the ball-carrier. This, in theory at least, makes it easier to play a possession-based game – and this is one reason Johan Cruyff preferred such a shape for the positional game he liked his teams to play. Zinedine Zidane's Real Madrid had plenty of success in a 4-3-3, too.

In attack, wide wingers flanking a single centre-forward can be enough to pin four defenders back. This creates an overload elsewhere on the pitch and should, in theory, make it easier to progress up the pitch.

Defensively, the 4-3-3 provides numbers and compactness in central areas. A staggered midfield shape – often a single pivot behind two number eights – makes it easier to defend the space between the defensive and midfield lines. It is easier to press high up the pitch, meanwhile, with three players in the front line rather than two.
Weaknesses
The main weakness of a 4-3-3 is that the single centre-forward can be left isolated, and is naturally underloaded whether playing against two or three centre-backs. This means you need a player in this position who is willing to do lots of work that may bring little or no reward. They also need to be strong and good enough on the ball to hold off several defenders.

The three central midfielders can end up numerically overloaded against four central players – for example, in a 4-4-2 diamond. The central midfielders can also end up with a lot of ground to cover. If they don’t get across the pitch following a switch of play, the full-backs can be left exposed and isolated with no wide midfielder ahead of them, and the winger usually high up the pitch. Opponents can also target wide areas on the counter-attack, particularly if a full-back has pushed up.
